# Code Review Snippets (2021-03-01)

## Two Ended List

### to else or not to else

Some people do this (I do, too...sometimes):

```java
if (head == null) {
  throw new NoSuchElementException("No element to get - the list is empty.");
}

return head.getData();
```

Why don't we need the else here?
(Yup...because of the throw.)

If you're not used to seeing this pattern (and it happens even more frequently when the if has a return in it), it can give you a "whaaa?" moment that's a bit unnerving. So maybe to avoid it, you should just put in the else, even though it's not necessary?

I'm not sure, to be honest - this is one of those personal preference things.


### look for opportunities to factor out things

I see a lot of this - in your code...and mine (though I like to think I'm getting better at it):

```java
if (head == null) {
      head = dataNode;
} else {
  dataNode.setNextNode(head);
  head.setPreviousNode(dataNode);
  head = dataNode;
}
```

You should start developing an eye for this kind of repetition - you see it there, right? With the `head = dataNode`?

Just like in algebra, where you can factor a common x out of `2x^2 + 5x` to get `x(2x + 5)`, so can you factor common statements out of conditional branches.

So the above code could become the equivalent:

```java
if (head != null) {
    dataNode.setNextNode(head);
    head.setPreviousNode(dataNode);
}
head = dataNode;
```

This was a particularly sweet example of this, because we got to peel off a conditional branch!


### don't make it if you don't need it

Here's a thing:

```java
Node<T> getHead = head;

if (isEmpty()) {
  throw new NoSuchElementException("No element to get - the list is empty.");
} else {
  return getHead.data;
}
```

We don't need to create a new variable here, right? Just use `return head.data` and all is well!


### small changes can make big differences

It's kind of annoying in a SLL how you have to run down to the end to add things to the tail, or the second-from-the-end to delete the tail.

If you make a small change like this

```java
private Node<T> headNode;
private Node<T> tailNode;
private int size;

public TwoEndedSll() {
  this.headNode = null;
  this.tailNode = null;
  this.size = 0;
}
```

Do you get how the addition of that single `tail` is kind of a game-changer when it comes to tail inserts?

If you had to delete tails frequently, what additional field could you make?


## Chibi Linked Stack

### don't forget to delegate the *whole* way there 

This was _almost_ there:

```java
// up in field land
private TwoEndedSll<T> stack;


// then later on this
public void push(T t) {
  if (isFull()) {
    throw new FullStackException("Cannot push to stack - it is full.");
  } else {
    stack.addTail(t);
    size++;
  }
}
```

See the problem? (Well, there are two, actually!)

1) Why bother tracking your own size? Doesn't good ole `TwoEndedSll` do that for you? Nuke that `size++`!
2) Adding to the tail...and removing from the tail...hmmm....might there not be a better place to be doing that? (And more importantly, do you get _why_?...)