# Lecture 01

**2021-01-11(W)**

Recording available here: (#)


## course introduction

**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**

This is kinda long, but hey - first day and all that.

### people introductions

- [ ] _briefly_ about JP
  - [ ] what to call me
  - [ ] experience
  - [ ] first time for both this online teaching thing **and* 2503
- [ ] let's talk about **you**: poll [[link]](https://directpoll.com/c?XDVhEtKBpjXmXVVd6SS1EcxO3VyGs9i)
- [ ] let's have a safe place to ask **anonymous** questions [[link]](https://onlinequestions.org/) 20210101
  - [ ] give it a try, please

### communication

- [ ] communication from **me** => **you**
  - [ ] I use BB Announcements. A lot.
- [ ] communication from **you** => **me**
  - [ ] email & live Meets via the Help System (we'll get to that later)
  - [ ] Discord's a slippery slope (queue jumpin'), so please don't

### where to find course stuff

- [ ] BB for announcements, grades, topic tests, and old lecture slides
- [ ] the big one: the course's GitHub wiki page: http://bit.ly/mru-comp2503-w21
  - [ ] what is GitHub?
  - [ ] **ACTION: bookmark that sucker**
  - [ ] let's go through the links in the ToC together  

#### ToC: class times & links

- [ ] lectures on Google Meet
  - [ ] what to expect in lectures (some talking, some demos)
  - [ ] recordings and lecture notes in weekly schedule (below)
  - [ ] old notes on BB (where? useful?)
- [ ] tutorials on Discord
  - [ ] **ACTION: get an account and get in before tomorrow**
  - [ ] what to expect in tutorials

#### ToC: drill checkpoints

- [ ] wanna get better at programming? then program!
- [ ] 20% of your final grade: 10 checkpoints @ 2% each
- [ ] needs your system set up a specific way
  - [ ] **ACTION: do that. Quickly.**
- [ ] uses The Process
  - [ ] **ACTION: learn it. Pronto.**

#### ToC: assessment dates & deadline

- [ ] should not shift that much; if it does, I'll inform you pronto and clearly
- [ ] notice that we have a test in two weeks
- [ ] notice that Feb is pretty low-key, March is "ugh", Apr I ease off

#### ToC: weekly schedule

- [ ] my vision: this is a place to go to figure out what we *will* cover and what we *have* covered
  - [ ] links to our lecture recordings 
- [ ] don't look *too* far ahead, as things will likely shift

#### ToC: getting help

#### ToC: how-tos

#### ToC: assessment

- [ ] perks
- [ ] what is cheating?

#### ToC: course outline

#### ToC: skills checklist

#### ToC: student-suggested resources

- [ ] know of some good stuffs? share!
  - [ ] curating is so valuable!
  - [ ] builds karma
  - [ ] how to share...that's next

#### help me with content!

- [ ] for student-suggested resources and more...submit issues!
  - [ ] a demo

#### help each other out!

- [ ] how do we get you guys to become a group? and have an easy way to ask each other for ideas and help?
  - [ ] I need ideas here...suggestions?


### JP's expectations

- [ ] you'll check BB daily
- [ ] you'll keep the pace
- [ ] you'll reach out if stuck (remember how?)
- [ ] you'll know where to look for stuff (where?)
- [ ] you'll keep track of due dates (where?)
- [ ] you'll take notes (but I'll give you what I have...where?)
- [ ] you'll help each other out...but don't steal opportunities from others...and play _fair_
- [ ] you'll use the Java 11 API documentation


  - [ ] where do we meet?
    - [ ] lectures on Meet
      - [ ] what to expect in lectures
      - [ ] recordings and lecture notes
      - [ ] old notes on BB
    - [ ] tutorials on Discord
      - [ ] **ACTION: get an account and get in before tomorrow**
      - [ ] what to expect in tutorials
  - [ ] when is stuff due?
    - [ ] tests?
    - [ ] drills?
    - [ ] assignments?
  - [ ] what about the final?
  - [ ] how are marks weighted?
  - [ ] can we work together?
  - [ ] karma


### so what's this course about?

- [ ] hmmm...what does the course outline say? (does it help?)
- [ ] 


### Java basics

- [ ] you'll have to catch up if you're behind
- [ ] review material from last semester available
- [ ] online resources available
- [ ] know your API
  - [ ] signature and return type
  - [ ] totally on written topic test A


### topic: arrays

- [ ] poll: how much have you used them up to now?
- [ ] poll: what do you know about them at this moment?


### what JP says he will do

- [ ] mark things in a timely fashion
- [ ] be available for help a lot
- [ ] make annotated lecture recording available


## your action items

- [ ] bookmark our GitHub page
- [ ] get into the Discord server
- [ ] - [ ] complete the setup how-tos (incl The Process)
- [ ] show up for the tutorial tomorrow and get the first drill done

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**