# Lecture 01

**2021-01-11(W)**

Recording available here: (#)


**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**


> _This is kinda crazy-long, but hey - first day and all that.  
The first part (half? I dunno!) will be about important course-related stuff.  
The second part will have us diving into the course proper._

## course introduction

### people introductions

- [ ] _briefly_ about JP
  - [ ] what to call me
  - [ ] experience
  - [ ] first time for both this online teaching thing *and* 2503
- [ ] let's talk about **you**: poll [[link]](https://directpoll.com/c?XDVhEtKBpjXmXVVd6SS1EcxO3VyGs9i)
- [ ] let's have a safe place to ask **anonymous** questions [[link]](https://onlinequestions.org/) 20210101
  - [ ] give it a try, please
  - [ ] I'll keep this open throughout the lecture(s)...unless it gets crazy

### communication with each other

- [ ] communication from **me** => **you**
  - [ ] I use BB Announcements. A lot.
- [ ] communication from **you** => **me**
  - [ ] email & live Meets via the Help System (we'll get to that later)
  - [ ] Discord's a slippery slope (queue jumpin'), so please don't

### where to find course stuff

- [ ] BB for announcements, grades, topic tests, and old lecture slides
- [ ] the big one: the course's GitHub wiki page: http://bit.ly/mru-comp2503-w21
  - [ ] what is GitHub?
  - [ ] **ACTION: bookmark that sucker**
  - [ ] let's go through the links in the ToC together  

#### ToC: class times & links

- [ ] lectures on Google Meet
  - [ ] what to expect in lectures (some talking, some demos)
  - [ ] recordings and lecture notes in weekly schedule (below)
  - [ ] old notes on BB (where? useful?)
- [ ] tutorials on Discord
  - [ ] **ACTION: get an account and get in before tomorrow**
  - [ ] what to expect in tutorials

#### ToC: drill checkpoints

- [ ] wanna get better at programming? then program!
- [ ] 20% of your final grade: 10 checkpoints @ 2% each
- [ ] working in groups? wel....
- [ ] needs your system set up a specific way
  - [ ] **ACTION: do that. Quickly.**
- [ ] uses The Process
  - [ ] **ACTION: learn it. Pronto.**
- [ ] you need to have **ZERO** issues of **ANY** kind to have your work considered complete! 

#### ToC: assessment dates & deadline

- [ ] should not shift that much; if it does, I'll inform you pronto and clearly
- [ ] notice that we have a test in two weeks
- [ ] notice that Feb is pretty low-key, March is "ugh", Apr I ease off

#### ToC: weekly schedule

- [ ] my vision: this is a place to go to figure out what we *will* cover and what we *have* covered
  - [ ] links to our lecture recordings (prolly just high-level)
  - [ ] links to skills
  - [ ] links to instructor notes
- [ ] don't look *too* far ahead, as things will likely shift based on our pace

#### ToC: getting help

- [ ] you will need help and...
  - [ ] I am **paid** to help you, and
  - [ ] I **truly enjoy** helping people, and
  - [ ] my availability is expansive, so
  - [ ] don't be a goof (I mean this with all respect!)
- [ ] how to get in touch (2 ways)
  - [ ] email
  - [ ] Help Form
  - [ ] **NO** Discord, please (queue jumpin' is bad...and I use - stupidly, I know - the same account for personal use)

#### ToC: how-tos

- [ ] intent: screencasts + written instructions on certain topics

---

_**DO WE NEED A SHORT BREATHER, FOLKS?  
ANY QUESTIONS, PERHAPS?**_

---

#### ToC: assessment

- [ ] mark breakdown
- [ ] grade calc weirdness (letters and percents and 4.0 living together)
- [ ] different assessments
  - [ ] drills (talked about already)
  - [ ] assignments (group ok...up to 2? 3?)
  - [ ] topic tests: timed, solo, and open
    - [ ] two flavours back-to-back: coding, then written
  - [ ] final exam: like a topic test double-header in a delicious 3-hour package
- [ ] perks
- [ ] what is cheating?
  - [ ] look at the mark split: 62%/38%
  - [ ] lean too much on others and you're just hangin' yourself

#### ToC: course outline

- I've got **two** versions: the "cover-my-instructor-butt" version and the "I'll delude myself into thinking students will actually read it because it's short" version.
- will you actually read them? Outta my hands...but my work here is done!

#### ToC: skills checklist

- want to make it clear what it is you're expected to know
- expected to know == can expect to be assessed on
- there's gonna be a ton of stuff here by the end of the semester...that's overwhelming, sure...but it's also purdy cool
- my *plan* is to cross-reference drill, assignments, and coding topic tests to this list

#### ToC: student-suggested resources

- [ ] know of some good stuffs? share!
  - [ ] curating is so valuable!
  - [ ] how to share...that's up next!


---

**That's it for the GitHub page ToC.  
お疲れ様!**

---

### some requests

#### help me with content!

- [ ] for student-suggested resources and more...submit issues!
  - [ ] a demo! (and a [how-to](../how-tos/submitting-issues-on-github.md) is also available)

#### help each other out!

- [ ] how do we get you guys to become a group? and have an easy way to ask each other for ideas and help?
  - [ ] I need ideas here...suggestions?


### JP's expectations

- [ ] you'll check BB daily
- [ ] you'll keep the pace
- [ ] you'll reach out if stuck (remember how?)
- [ ] you'll know where to look for stuff (where?)
- [ ] you'll keep track of due dates (where?)
- [ ] you'll take notes (but I'll give you what I have...where?)
- [ ] you'll help each other out...but don't steal opportunities from others...and play _fair_
- [ ] you'll use the Java 11 API documentation

### JP's commitments

- [ ] why should you have all the expectations?
  - [ ] I dunno if you'll read [this](../otherdocs/OSCS-Staff-Favourite.pdf)...but you should
- [ ] at the very least, I promise to:
  - [ ] do my best to teach in a challenging and engaging way
  - [ ] mark things in a timely fashion
  - [ ] be available for help a lot
  - [ ] make annotated lecture recording available
  - [ ] work harder than I'm working you


---

_**DO WE NEED ANOTHER SHORT BREATHER, FOLKS?  
QUESTIONS?**_

---

### so what's this course about?

- [ ] hmmm...what does the course outline say? (does it help?)
  - [ ] [official calendar description](https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/course-resources/blob/main/README.md#course-description)
  - [ ] [the learning outcomes](https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/course-resources/blob/main/learning-outcomes.md) are a bit more specific
  - [ ] kind of a grab bag, ain't it? historically, that's not surprising...
- [ ] main points
  - [ ] there's a LOT of data out there
    - [ ] how you *store* it - the _structure_ of it - is important
    - [ ] the *algorithms* you use to *manipulate* it are important
  - [ ] "the right tool for the right job" (don't use ArrayList all the time..."when all you have is a hammer....")
  - [ ] know how the sausage is made
  - [ ] build your own lightsaber
  - [ ] reach Intermediate-level Java programmer achievement
  - [ ] eat your own dog food
  - [ ] know how to *measure*, so that you can *compare*, so that you can *decide*


### Java basics

- [ ] you'll have to catch up if you're behind
- [ ] review material from last semester available
- [ ] online resources available
- [ ] maybe some folks can add some resources they've found useful?
- [ ] **I expect that know your API**
  - [ ] doesn't mean memorizing it (though starting to build a familiarity with common classes is super-useful)
  - [ ] know how to find things
  - [ ] know how to skim the method listings
  - [ ] **must** understand signature and return type
    - [ ] totally on written topic test A


### topic: arrays

[poll link](https://directpoll.com/c?XDVhEtM3t8dL82zpfC3cwixNo0tRr3bCm)

- [ ] the basic idea
  - [ ] buncha memory boxes
  - [ ] what's _in_ those boxes? primitive types vs. reference types
- [ ] let's look at the [skill list](https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/course-resources/blob/main/target-skills.md#arrays)
  - [ ] create an array that holds a primitive or a reference type?
  - [ ] place something in an array at a given index?
  - [ ] initialize an array manually?
  - [ ] initialize an array with shorthand/shortcut syntax?
  - [ ] get something out of an array at a given index?
  - [ ] find the length of an array?
  - [ ] tell the difference between an array's fill level and capacity?
  - [ ] iterate through an array using for/for-each?
  - [ ] print out array contents nicely with `Arrays.toString`?
  - [ ] copy an array using `Arrays.copyOf`?

  
---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

---

## your action items

- [ ] bookmark our GitHub page
- [ ] get into the Discord server
- [ ] complete the setup how-tos (incl The Process)
- [ ] show up for the tutorial tomorrow and get the first drill done

## coming up

- [ ] **tomorrow in tutorial**, I'll be there to help you with any drill checkpoint issues you are having.
  - [ ] if you are finding this stuff (currently) easy, instead of skipping, why not swing by and help your fellow classmates out?
- [ ] **Friday in lecture**, we will unpack the wonders of:
  - [ ] implementing `equals` and its buddy, `hashCode`
  - [ ] interfaces (in particular, `List` and `Comparable`)
  - [ ] sorting via `Collections.sort`

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**