# Lecture 02

**2021- [ ]01- [ ]15 (F)**

Recording available here: #


**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**


## checking in

[poll link](https://directpoll.com/r?XDbzPBd3ixYqg8IJwYJYNwRcb0rW2DlH4WANmSmT)

- [ ] I'll make my expectations more clear with the Discord tuts
- [ ] you can't ignore getting familiar with The Process - [ ] it isn't going away, I'm afraid
- [ ] if you're stuck, reach out pronto, please
- [ ] any questions? https://onlinequestions.org/  20210102

## let's explore explorer

- [ ] windows explorer: sorting time
  - [ ] so we can **order** things
  - [ ] if things are in a certain **order**, we say they're...what?
  - [ ] that's important

## ordering things

- [ ] visualizing **order**
  - [ ] we'll use concept of **before** and **after** a lot
  - [ ] examples
    - [ ] numbers, text, heights, dates
  - [ ] not measurable? no order possible
  - [ ] we can increase from left to right (**ascending order**) or decrease from left to right (**descending order**)
  - [ ] side note: left to rightiness is a cultural thing

> _The common orderings we're concerned about in drills and such are ascending/descending on some numeric value, alphabetic (or reverse alphabetic), and chronological._

## how would you algo this?

- [ ] let's say we have a collection (at most size 2!) that we want to fill with numbers
- [ ] numbers should always be in ascending order
- [ ] build an algo
  - [ ] don't forget to test it out!
- [ ] cool - [ ] let's see if this works in codeland

## making a thing to order

- [ ] quick: something that makes a lot of noise
  - [ ] code it up! we'll need at least a couple of fields
  - [ ] what different ways of ordering can we think of using the fields?
  - [ ] which way seems most natural? we've just found our **natural ordering**
    - [ ] this might change, depending on your needs, right?
    - [ ] in Java, we're kinda stuck with it...buuuuut....

## a collection of things

- [ ] where do you wanna keep these things?
  - [ ] differences between these things? sounds like a test question
- [ ] let's say we want to insert in order
  - [ ] why can this be useful?
- [ ] let's go to the board and algo this up
  - [ ] don't forget to do a quick test with some samples
- [ ] code up that algo
  - [ ] comesAfter ... keep your eye on this guy
  - [ ] don't forget to test a bit!
    - [ ] hey look! **List.of** SUPER USEFUL
  
> _jp says_  
> Why you not for you testing?!? Stop that!

- [ ] what do we need to do to order things in the other direction?
  - [ ] huh. That wasn't so hard. Thanks, comesAfter!


## let's make another thing to order

- [ ] quick: name something that moves slowly
- [ ] let's make that!
  - [ ] fields, please
  - [ ] natural ordering, please
  - [ ] will our other algo work on this?
  - [ ] damn...comesAfter seems pretty useful....

## hmmm...a problem?

- [ ] anyone notice an issue with our algo?
- [ ] what does this mean for our friend comesAfter?
- [ ] let's deal with this later!

## comesAfter...I love ya...but I hate ya

- [ ] so do we need to add a comesAfter to everything?!?!
  - [ ] do you put everything you've coded into collections?!?
  - [ ] even if you did...does ordering some things even make sense?!?
- [ ] ...but it would be nice if we could opt in, right?
  - [ ] "if I, the developer want to make sure my class makes easily- [ ]orderable things, I'll force myself to add a comesAfter"
    - [ ] guess what? :) there's an App for that
  
## Java interfaces

- [ ] lets make an **interface** out of comesAfter
  - [ ] how should we name this? hoo boy
  - [ ] let's just call it Orderable
  - [ ] notice the syntax
    - [ ] no public necessary (though you can put it in)
    - [ ] no method bodies - [ ] usually
- [ ] next: force our 2 classes to **implement** this **interface**
  - [ ] notice the sytax
  - [ ] notice how Java will bark if method doesn't exist

## but wait - [ ] it gets cooler

- [ ] quick: name something you do to food
- [ ] make another interface...and have our friends implement _that_, too
- [ ] yes - [ ] you can implement _multiple_ interfaces

## ...and even cooler!

- [ ] let's make an array of type...Orderable!
- [ ] WTF!?!? 
- [ ] I don't care WHO you are - I only care about WHAT YOU CAN DO

> _pro tip_  
> _Now that you know about this, you should try, **whenever possible** - and it's **definitely** not always possible! - to use interfaces when you declare variables._

## polymorphism through interfaces

- [ ] [this thing](https://www2.cs.arizona.edu/~mercer/Presentations/OOPD/05-PolymorphismViaInterfaces.pdf) from Rick Mercer (no not that one) at U of Arizona does a very good job explaining 

## guess what? we reinvented the wheel

- [ ] there's already a method like comesAfter that's in Java...and to include it, we include the **Comparable** interface
- [ ] let's look at it in the API docs
  - [ ] one method, **compareTo**
    - [ ] what's with the T?!? we only want to compare apples to apples (makes sense, right?)
    - [ ] what's its sig?
    - [ ] return type? (_often_ -1, 0, 1...but only *has* to be <0, 0, >0)

  - [ ] what classes implement it? some old friends in there!
    - [ ] keep those in mind!


## visualizing compareTo

- [ ] let's go to the board
- [ ] A.compareTo(B)
  - [ ] negative result: "A comes before B"
  - [ ] zero result: "A is the same(!! careful !!) as B"
  - [ ] positive result: "A comes after B"

## now we can sort stuff! 

- [ ] if we have time? (doubt it!)...if not, I'll screencast
- [ ] if we have a collection of things (like an array or ArrayList) AND those things have a natural ordering...
  - [ ] Collections.sort (lookit the API...see anything familiar?)
  - [ ] Arrays.sort (lookit the API...see anything familiar?)
- [ ] let's sort our things from the start of class now!

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

---

## terms used

- [ ] **ascending/descending**
- [ ] **natural order**
- [ ] (Java) **interface**
- [ ] **implement** (an interface)
- [ ] **Comparable<T>**
- [ ] **compareTo**
- [ ] **Collections.sort**
- [ ] **Arrays.sort**

## your action items

- [ ] finish the first drill by 4:45 today
- [ ] get working on the Checkpoint 1 ones
- [ ] you now have enough to finish all of Checkpoint 1's drills, and they're all due Thursday...so that's a thing

## coming up

- [ ] the Comparator interface
- [ ] simple lambdas
- [ ] generics
- [ ] algorithm analysis (oooooh...scary sounding)

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**