# Lecture 03

**2021-01-20 (W)**

Recording available here: https://youtu.be/oE6JEcwS-pQ

Code playground here: https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/lecture-playground.git

Anonymous question board here: https://onlinequestions.org/ (20210103)


**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**


## checking in

[poll link](https://directpoll.com/r?XDbzPBd3ixYqg8hPSCpAcdV3VibwOj81h7YzQxP)

- about partnering on the assignment
  - doc to fill out at end
  - email me (one group has already) if you're planning on having a partner for the assignment
  - if you want a partner, but don't have anyone in mind...fill in [this spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1evMfEuM09lXf67mY46TFcM3aGOI8M-yA6kf3j5rIK5Y/edit?usp=sharing) and send me your Code Name
- about flipping
  - I'd still have classes (and record them!), but they'd be more about me asking questions under the assumption you've watched the material
  - in case you're wondering, some people think this isn't teaching (they're wrong, but...)
  - remember that you can ff and jump around in vids, unlike realtime lectures

- [ ] communication request


## recap

- to sort/order things, you need to compare them
  - before/after
- if your class implements the Comparable interface, you define a natural order
- to implement Comparable, you need a `compareTo` (neg, zero, pos) method
  - ascending / descending numerics
  - (reverse) alphabetic using String compareToIgnoreCase
  - (reverse) chronological using built-in compareTo
  - multi-field 
- you can sort Lists and arrays of Comparable things using `Collections.sort`
- equals is tricky
  - default is about memory locations
  - "practical" is about fields
  - Eclipse helps out...but you still have to step in sometimes
    - and I expect you to know what the autogen code is doing
    - no...seriously

---

## TOPIC: the Comparator interface

Cast off the chains of Natural Ordering. Liberate the Babies! (and the Snails, while you're at it)

- [ ] to the IDE!
  - [ ]  imagine we want to order Babies simply by alphabetic order...but the class doesn't belong to us.


### implementing it


- [ ] just one little method: `int compare(T o1, T o2)`
- [ ] if you're kinda getting comfortable with the compareTo stuff, tie "this" to "o1" and "other" to "o2"
   - [ ] to the whiteboard
 - [ ] back to Elipse
   - [ ] so we've got this "rough" way of writing compareTo
   - [ ] better option for numbers: use 

### where to PUT these things?

It depends on whether it's *your* class that's being compared:

- [ ] NO? Then
  - [ ] option 1: make a top-level or nested class
  - [ ] option 2: one-line what you need, when you need it
- [ ] YES? Then either of the above work, AND...
- [ ] option 3: put them as conveniences in the class being compared

## making a class

- [ ] option 1: top-level class (what you've been doing since 1501), or
- [ ] option 2: create a static nested class
- [ ] which one's better? 
  - [ ] what does that even mean?

## inline styles

- [ ] old-school: anonymous classes (ugh)
- [ ] new-school: lambda expressions

## using the Comparator in Collections.sort

- that's nice! One thing to make it nicer?...
> _**Go look at the API for ArrayList. Notice anything...interesting. Something involving...sorting?...**_

###  cool static methods in the Comparator class

- [ ] wait...this interface has working methods in it?!?!
  - [ ] comparing
  - [ ] thenComparing
  - [ ] reverseOrder
  - [ ] :: notation

### rethinking our compareTos

- [ ] let's rewrite one of our compareTos
- [ ] more to follow in a screencast

---

## TOPIC: Java generics

You've been using them since you were a young pup...and you never even knew it. Why must the old keep things from the young?!??!

### remember parameters?

- [ ] to the whiteboard
  - [ ] what a method with parameters looks like v. a class with parameters
- [ ] differences you can see?

### following convention

- [ ] take a look at the *Type Parameter Naming Conventions* section of [this part of the Java Tutorials](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/generics/types.html) - which is a dry, but very useful, tutorial BTW
- [ ] PMD and Checkstyle will bark, btw
- [ ] don't worry about wildcards (like ? and *); that's an advanced topic we don't cover in this course

### Eclipse tweak

- [ ] grrr...PMD doesn't catch this issue, so have to tweak my `.classpath` file in Eclipse, tweak filters in Package Explorer

### start off with a insanely contrived example: Buds

- [ ] note how we can have more than one type (just like a method can have more than one parameter)

### so where would you actually USE this?

- [ ] "boxing" classes (`Optional<T>`)
  - [ ] separate screencast (on the assignment, too)
  - [ ] let's make a Stomach...and introduce a wacky annoyance when using generics with types that have to implement an interface
- [ ] much more common: collections (ArrayList, anyone?)
  - [ ] let's make our Stomach...bigger


### things you can't do with generics

- [ ] can't put primitives in - have to use the boxed version (int => Integer, char => Character, etc)

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

[EXIT POLL](https://directpoll.com/r?XDbzPBd3ixYqg8xo3HpVHmgqwI2hDOwSFhLYxdxe)

---

## terms used

- [ ] **`Comparator<T>`**
- [ ] **`anonymous class`**
- [ ] **`lambda`**

## your action items

- [ ] finish your checkpoint 1 drills
- [ ] take a boo at the assignment

## coming up

- [ ] algorithm analysis

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**