# Lecture 07

**2021-02-03 (W)**

Recordings available here: 

- [Intro](https://youtu.be/wNDNes5W4Zo)[28.32]
- [List ADT](https://youtu.be/NgWzJ_w2-5w)[12:45]
- [Stacks](https://youtu.be/wvzO_UIzGp4)[24:13]
- [Queues](https://youtu.be/93eceP8urf4)[18:50]


**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**


## before we begin

- reminder that there's an online textbook available (check the course outline)
- incoming assignment one nudges
  - if you haven't started yet...start, even just a bit
  - Perk opportunities
    - this is meant to get you moving and to encourage you to use GitHub as a type of backup for your work!
    - at the very least, you should push your work when a given grade's tests are passing
  - if you're looking for a partner, that sheet
  - if you've found a partner and not let me know...let me know
  - additional partner stuff:
    - make sure you and your partner share the same vision (grade, time to put in) and have complementary Java comfort levels
    - how will you work together? (GitHub? CodeTogether? emails?)
      - I can give you access to each other's GH if you let me know
    - you have an [additional document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/17KJseOlgIy_BKan5XJTtgwFex8WS6pJwLmEzK1A8Azk/edit?usp=sharing) to hand in by the due date
- and one more thing about Perks - and this has been said already, but bears repeating: if you want to use your Perks, I'd suggest the following flow:
    1. check your marks on BB - that's where your Perk count is
    2. if you decide to spend some Perks, finish the drill(s) you intend to make "un-late"
    3. send JP an email when you're done and let him know the sitch.

---

## overview

- we'll start with a little refresher on algorithms
- then onto Abstract Data Types: what they are and how they tie into algorithms
- the Stack ADT
- the Queue ADT
- collapse in exhaustion

## algorithms: the _steps_ we take

- reminder: we build _programs_ to solve _problems_
- the **algorithm** (the _steps_) is usually a focus of our attention when solving a problem

    > _refresher:_  
    > _an algorithm is kinda like a recipe:_
    > - _unambiguous series of steps that turn a defined set of inputs into some defined set of outputs_  
    > - _needs to terminate (duh) and give us the result we want (duh)_

- we'd like to use algorithms that have good performance

    > _in this course, we focus on measuring performance by how long it takes the algorithm to run - so **faster** algorithms are considered **better** algorithms_
    >  
    > _(space can be important, too - it's just not the focus here!)_
    
- we've studied a way to measure the speed of an algorithm, right? (hello, growth functions) and to estimate the upper bound of that speed when the algorithm has to deal with lots of things (hello, Big O), so don't be surprised when we talk about "n" and "linear order", etc

    > _you'll be happy to know that we often just appeal to common sense and say things like "...as you can imagine, this will take about n steps in the worst case"_

### example problem to solve: find the max in a list of numbers

- imagine we have a list of positive numbers and want to find the biggest
  - so we have our input defined ("a list of positive numbers")
  - and we have a target output ("a single number, which is the largest one in the list")

    > _hopefully, you might have some alarm bells going off...perhaps you might be wondering "are the numbers in order?", or  "are there duplicates?", or "what if the list is empty?", or..._
     
- a simple algorithm for this problem might be:
  
    ```
    max <- 0
    
    for each num in the list do:
      if num > max
        max <- num
    
    return max
    ```
  
  > _So if our list has n things, this algorithm has a growth function of T(n) = 2n + 2, so this is an O(n), or linear growth, algorithm_
  >  
  > _If you're queasy with these T(n) things, we could have also reasoned like this: "we've got to look through all n items in the list to find the max, so that's order n"...not so bad, right?_

### an interesting twist

  - so what if the list of numbers was already **ordered**? can we improve on our algorithm? hell yeah!

    ```
    // assume list is in ascending order
    
    return last item in list
    ```
  
  > _Wow.   
  So that's T(n) = 1 and thus O(1), or constant time: the holy grail - no matter how many items are in the list, as long as it's ordered, we can solve this problem at blinding speed._


### seems too easy

We're kinda glossing over the fact that the list had to be in order already. Not to mention the fact that we've been throwing the word "list" around without being clear about what that meant.

Let's deal with that last bit first. 

That order part?...we'll see it again some other time.

## ADTs: it's not just the steps that are important

- new vocab time: **Abstract Data Type, or ADT**
  - my Weiss textbook says it's *"a set of objects together with a set of operations"*. Hmmm. Okaaaay...
  - my Dale/Joyce/Weems textbook says it's *"a data type whose properties (domain and operations) are specified independently of any particular implementation"*. Uh....
  - and good ole Wikipedia says it's *"a mathematical model for data types"*. Good Lord.
- since these are vague and I'm never going to ask you to define ADT on a test, why don't we go with something like "an ADT is some data - usually a bunch of it - and a list of operations we can use with that data"
  - still pretty vague. Let's go back to our original list and try to firm it up.
  - btw: you still need to have a "feel" for what ADT means...it pops its head up a lot

### our first ADT: List

So let's firm up what we mean by a List.

- some characteristics data needs to have to be considered being part of a list:
  - there's 0 or more data (I'll call it stuffs)
  - the stuffs are _ordered_ - not in the sense that they are _sorted_ (though they _could_ be) - just in the sense that we can say there's a first stuff, followed by a second stuff, followed by a third stuff, etc
  - each stuff has a _position_, starting with 0, then 1, then 2,...
  - visually, a list looks like a line of stuffs
- some operations we usually find with lists (ADTs, by the way, are defined in different ways by different folks...and that's fine)
  - at least one operation to **add** an element...somewhere
  - at least one operation to **get** an element... from somewhere (this does not mean **remove** the element - just **look** at it)
  - at least one operation to **remove** an element...from somewhere
  - at least one operation to ask the list "are you **empty**?"
  - at least one operation to ask the list "how many stuffs do you hold?"
  
- something important to note: we are not talking about **implementation details** in here at all. That is a crucial thing to take away here: ADTs are about the **what** and not the **how**. (We'll be dealing with the how later!)
- if you go back and look at the ADT definitions mentioned earlier, the first two should make a bit more sense now. (That Wikipedia one? Not so much. :) )

### our List ADT is vital to our algorithm!

Going back to our original "find the max" problem and the algorithm we used there - do you see that our List ADT is **absolutely necessary** for its success?
- for starters, our problem itself says "imagine we have a **list** of..." :)
- we couldn't even **have** a list if there wasn't a way to **add** stuff to it!
- "for each num in the list do": can't do **that** without the operations that let us find out how many things are in the list and that let us **get** things from the list
  - ditto for our much improved algorithm "return last item in list"
- **takeaway**: every problem that needs to be solved with software and that deals with more than one thing will need **both** an algorithm that provides the steps to solve the problem **and** an ADT which provides the structure of the data and the operations that are vital for the algorithm to do its job!
  
## Stacks

Let's talk about one of the ADTs mentioned in the course's [learning outcomes](https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/course-resources/blob/main/learning-outcomes.md#learning-outcomes): the Stack
  
  > _The astute reader may note that the phrase **data structure** is used instead of ADT in the learning outcomes. They are different things, but very much related. We'll get to this topic shortly._
  
### the concept

  - it's a stack of plates
  - no, really - that's it
  - LIFO - there's a word for you to know

### a bit more formally

  - like a list, we have a collection of stuffs and it has an order
  - there's only one position, though: the **top** of the stack...you can't talk about any other stuffs!
  - our stack operations are quite limited. Traditionally, we have:
    - an operation to add a new stuff on top: this has a special name in Stackland: **push**
    - an operation to remove the top stuff: this also has a special name in Stackland: **pop**
  - often, a Stack ADT might add in a few more operations which make the Stack a bit more useful. Common optional ones are:
    - an operation to look at - not pop - the top: this is often called **peek** or **top**
    - an operation to tell you if the Stack is empty or not  

  > _Hmmm.... 
  > what if we try to remove/look at the top - and there's nothing there? We'll cover this when we deal with implementing a Stack!_

### is this actually useful?!?!

Well...yes, believe it or not. Let's give a few examples of where you can use a Stack and it's "just right".

#### method calls

Let's imagine you're a busy person, constantly being interrupted with tasks. Let's also imagine you're _terrible_ at prioritizing: if anyone interrupts you, you drop what you're doing and give them your full attention...until you're interrupted again, that is.

When you finish a task, you go back to the task you were doing before you were interrupted. (Maybe you write down some notes to remind yourself what you were doing when you were interrupted.)

Here's what a bit of your day might be like:

- you're chilling, 'cause nothing's happening
- a co-worker comes by and asks if you could look at a report she's been writing. You say "sure!" and get to work on that.
- about 10 minutes in, a phone call comes in; it's your Grandma, who wants to talk about the game of Bocce she had yesterday with Ruth Glinsburg. You put a sticky-note on the part of the report you were reading and start chatting.
- 5 minutes later, you get an email from Lorne in Accounting who has a cat video that they say you've just *got* to see, so you put Grans on hold (jotting down a note: "she was talking about Ruth flubbing the shot in the second frame") and it's off to the cat vid.
- you watch the vid. So adorable. OK - back to G-dawg.
- you get back on the phone, apologize, and ask her about the second frame.
- 2 minutes into the conversation, your boss comes by ("sorry, Gran - gotta put you on hold a sec again"...jot down "Ruth's hat totally inappropriate?!?") and your heart sinks as your boss tells you you have to get in touch with the UI team *now* about the issues with the Delete Button in the current alpha build of your latest project....  

Well, you get the idea.

If you've taken COMP2531, you'll recognize that this is basically what happens in a computer program when the program hits a method call - it stops what it's doing, saves the info it needs (the **context**) to a stack, and then starts to work on that new method call. When it gets to the end of a method, it pops off the top of the stack and picks up where it left off on the method it was working on when it was interrupted.

#### undoing things

You're all familiar with Undo functionality - one of the greatest inventions of the computer era! It's totally done using a Stack! (sometimes multiple Stacks)

The basic idea is something like this:

- the user performs some action that is Undoable
- _something_ is placed on an Undo Stack...it might be some code that somehow _reverses_ the action (like turns a switch OFF if the action was to turn it ON), or it might be code that represents the state of things before the action occurred
- as the user continues to perform undoable actions, the Stack grows
- when the user wants to undo, the Stack is popped and either the reversal is done or the state of the "world" is set back to what it was before the action

_A short, interesting, and easy-to-ready Quora posting is available [here](https://qr.ae/pNzkbO) on the topic._

Assignment One involves an Undo Stack (at the A+ level) that uses the "save the state" version of undoing.

#### other problems where stacks are useful

- your browser history is very stack-like
- backtracking algorithms (like finding your way through a maze)
- compilers often use stacks to check syntax (like matching brackets, braces, etc)
- a number of fancy algorithms (all of which are beyond the scope of this course) use stacks to help them get their work done

### give it a try

See if you can figure out a way to solve the following problem using a Stack - you don't have to code it up or anything. Just think of some high-level pseudocode:

>  given a word, and assuming you can access that word's individual letters, how could you print out that word backwards using a Stack?



## Queues

This is another common ADT that we're expected to cover. Queues are super-useful, though easy to mis-type. ;)

### the concept

  - it's waiting in line at Superstore, but with a fancy British accent
  - no, really - that's it
  - FIFO - there's a word for you to know

### a bit more formally

  - like a List and Stack, we have a collection of stuffs and it has an order
  - unlike a Stack, there are **two** locations we deal with: the **head** of the queue (the "front of the line") and the **tail** of the queue (the "back of the line"). You can't deal with stuffs at any other location.
  - Traditionally, a Queue will have operations like these:
    - an operation to add a new stuff to the end of the line: this has a special name: **enqueue**. (It's pronounced "NQ" - like "NQ very much for telling me this poor joke").
    - an operation to remove the stuff at the head of the line: this also has a special name: **dequeue**. (It's pronounced "DQ" - like "DQ something different". You will most certainly mistype it repeatedly.)

  - often, a Queue ADT might add in a few more operations which make the Queue a bit more useful. Common optional ones are:
    - operations to look at - but not remove - the head or tail
    - an operation to tell you if the Queue is empty or not
    - an operation to tell you how many things are in the Queue (often called **size**)

### is this actually useful?!?!

Aw, **hell** yeah! Maybe even more so that Stacks!

#### business programs

Any kind of online service that involves access to a limited resources and wishes to deal with the sale of these resources in a "fair" way almost always uses some kind of queue. First-come first-serve, baby. Buying tickets online (concert, movie, airline)? 

#### simulations

Queues abound in real life...we do a lot of waiting out there:

- transit situations (getting on busses, planes, trains....not to mention the vehicles needing to wait as well, such as planes needing to wait to take off or land, or trains needing to wait for other trains to leave/depart)
- traffic (waiting at stop lights, merging onto freeways, waiting for parking spaces to open up)
- waiting to be served in a restaurant...or at a supermarket...or in a hospital

There's actually a whole branch of mathematics dedicated to this stuff - it's called queueing theory.

Computers let us simulate situations like the above - and plenty more. Governments and private companies use these simulations to figure out how waiting times can be improved, or access to limited resource be more fair in some way.  And queues are obviously important in these simulations!

#### computer internals

Computers often use queues:

- processes that are waiting to get their turn to play with the CPU
- mail messages that a mail server needs to send out
- even the Java Scanner hooked up to System.in ... the letters that are coming in from the keyboard are placed in a special Queue called a buffer (buffers are super-common when dealing with computer I/O)


### give it a try

See if you can figure out a way to solve the following problem using a Stack and a Queue - you don't have to code it up or anything. Just think of some high-level pseudocode:


> given a word, determine whether it is a _palindrome_ (a word that is the same whether you read it back-to-front or front-to-back), like "kayak" and "racecar"

## QUESTIONS?

Ask 'em!

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

[EXIT POLL]()

---

## terms used

- [ ] **algorithm**
- [ ] **data structure**
- [ ] **abstract data type (ADT)**
- [ ] **List**
- [ ] **Stack**
  - [ ] **push**
  - [ ] **pop**
  - [ ] **peek/top**
  - [ ] **LIFO**
- [ ] **Queue**
  - [ ] **enqueue**
  - [ ] **dequeue**
  - [ ] **FIFO**

## your action items

- [ ] finish up those drills
- [ ] get on that assignment if you haven't already

## coming up

- [ ] implementing array-backed stacks
- [ ] implementing array-backed queues

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**