# Lecture 08

**2021-02-05 (F)**

Recording available here: https://youtu.be/o6nULgHGOvs

Code playground here: https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/lecture-playground (do a git pull if you've already cloned this repo before; otherwise, you can clone it into your Eclipse workspace directory)

Anonymous question board here: https://onlinequestions.org/ (20210108)

**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**

   
## checking in 

[poll link](https://directpoll.com/r?XDbzPBd3ixYqg8GlGpP45k4oWi0VLayd3cIitX0Z7)


## before we begin

- reminder of online text http://opendatastructures.org/ods-java/
  - might be especially useful now we've hit this part of the course
- assignment: D-level changed + keep an eye on the bug/change list document
- Your Pace column up
- bounty idea for Perks...
- any questions?
   
---

## Review

- what you should have picked up from the screencasts:
  - we solve problems by creating algorithms
  - algorithms - at least ones that deal with numerous things - make use of Abstract Data Types (ADTs) to do their job
  - ADTs are a "buncha data and some some operations on that data". Note the word **abstract**!
  - we learned a bit about 3 ADTs:
    - List (just as a means of example)
    - Stack (need to know)
    - Queue (need to know)


## The Plan

We're going to move from the abstract to the concrete now - how do we actually _implement_ these ADTs and make them _real_?

While we're at it, we'll look a the cost (in Big O) of some common operations for our implementations of Stacks and Queues.

## So how to go from ADT -> reality?

- ADTs are great and all - we can bang out algorithms on a whiteboard knowing we've got things like "Stacks", "Queues", and "Lists" in our back pocket...
- ...but eventually our boss wants to see some working code.
- you know how we say an ADT "has some operations that it must have"? Does that ring a bell at all? Bear some similarity to something we've seen in a few weeks ago?
- some languages, like Java, make it very easy to specify the operations of an ADT.

## Example: let's get started on making Stack a reality

- first step: decide on what operations we need (remember we have some flexibility, depending on our needs)
- next: turn those operations into a Java interface
- then: um....what do we actually *use* to make this sucker work?!?

### Data Structures: the key to making ADTs "real"

- a **data structure** is a...what?
  - well...it gets confusing. Grrrr....
    - if I look at the course slides from the last few years, what do we see?
    - if I look at textbooks (I've got 3 here at home)...they're kind of all over the place
    - Wikipedia goes yet another direction
- we're going to go with (and I'm not going to ask this on a test - it's just so we have a common vocab during our lectures): "data structures are ADTs made real". 
- some important takeaways about them:
  - they're used as ways of organizing and manipulating "large" - a fuzzy term - amounts of data
  - some data structures are fairly general-purpose...you can use them in a variety of situations and they work pretty darn well
  - other data structures are very specialized - you would only reach for them in certain situations...but when you have a problem that matches that situation, these specialized data structures are freakin' awesome
  - they're meant to be an tool for our algorithms to use to get their work done: by choosing the "right" data structure for an algorithm, you increase your chances of making an effective/efficient/fast algorithm
  - makes sense?
  
### Back to the Stack, Jack

- we'll make an array-backed Stack; to avoid the nastiness of dealing with generic arrays, we'll make this Stack a StringStack (it will only handle Strings)
- implement our methods one-by-one, ad-hoc testing as we go...go to the whiteboard, too
  - what happens when empty? 
    - there's a built-in EmptyStackException, but...
  - what happens when full?
  - notice the ADT didn't have to worry 'bout that crap
- do ad-hoc testing with main (very useful technique - put it in your toolkit if it's not there already)
- coverage tool...neat! (well, *I* think it is....)

  > _Uh oh_  
  > _Let's make a toString and see what happens when we use our Stack - pop the hood...._
  >  
  > _Huh. We might have a problem here..._
  > _Let's draw it out to make sure we understand what's going on._
  >  
  > _How do we fix this?_

- what are the costs of our operations?
- what are the strengths of this implementation? weaknesses?

#### some things you could think about

- what would we need to do to make this Stack unbounded? (and does this ring a bell with one of the drills we had this week?)
  - what is the cost of this?
- there is a built-in Stack in Java...how does **it** work?
  - how could we find out? why don't we go take a boo?


## Example: let's make a Queue

Let's follow the same process as with our Stack:

- first step: decide on what operations we need (remember we have some flexibility, depending on our needs)
- next: turn those operations into a Java interface
- next: start implementing (again, we'll go array-backed)
- 
  
  
## QUESTIONS?

Ask 'em!

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

[EXIT POLL]()

---

## terms used

- [ ] **data structure**
- [ ] **array-backed Stack/Queue**


## your action items

- [ ] hit an assignment checkpoint or two before end-of-day Saturday (if you wanna grab a Perk or 3) [reminder that JP works 12-2:45 on Saturdays]

## coming up

- [ ] linked lists...bring yer pencil & paper

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**