# Lecture 09

**2021-02-10 (W)**

Recording available here: https://youtu.be/dQ5fiI19woA

Code playground here: https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/lecture-playground (do a git pull if you've already cloned this repo before; otherwise, you can clone it into your Eclipse workspace directory)

Anonymous question board here: https://onlinequestions.org/ (20210109)

**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**

   
## checking in 

[poll link](https://directpoll.com/r?XDbzPBd3ixYqg8ZzJApYVXGgt1uFh2RK0QrIjGi)


## before we begin

- don't forget to "submit" your assignment stages (at least if you want the Perks)
   
---

## Review

- we turned the Stack and Queue ADTs into data structures; used backing arrays
- good performance for adds/removals
- problem arises if we reach capacity
- can we get around this problem? not foreshadowing _at all_


## The Plan

We're gonna build us an alternative to arrays and see what that gets us. (Hint: a lot)

## meet The Node

- simple bugger: data + link
- let's make one
- tada!
- pop open the debugger

## wow. that's...underwhelming

- you think so?
- well, let's make two and try something
- probably need to go to the whiteboard a bit here
  - contiguous memory
  - the contents of memory can have an address, effectively "pointing" to it (hello, arrow)
- remember when I've (repeatedly) harped about drawing pictures?...
  - what do the _boxes_ mean?
  - what do the _arrows_ mean?
  - the notation for null
- we draw things this way because thinking about the boxes and numbers would explode our brains - let's not do that, k?
- link the two up and go to the debugger again

## bestill my beating heart

- let's keep at it...let's add a third...and fourth
- let's pop into the debugger again
- does this resemble anything we've seen before?

## if it looks like a list...

- ...then let's actually make it a List!
- let's add these operations to an interface:
  - prepend (aka "add to the front/head")
  - append (aka "add to the back/tail")
  - add at index i (don't forget bounds!)
  - get at index i (don't forget bounds!)
  - get index of target (aka "where's Waldo?")
  - remove at index i
  - get size
  - ask if is empty
- and now it's time to implement this interface!

This is gonna take up the rest of the lecture, I reckon, so buckle up.

> _**What about Node?**_  
> _Don't put it as an upper level class...it's an implementation detail. Nobody who uses our List - including ourselves - should even know it's there. We want to perform **information hiding** and keep that sh*t behind the curtain._
>   
> _So where **should** it go?_  
> _We'll use best practices and shove it in something called a **static member class**. This is a common technique when you need a little helper class for something bigger you're creating and want to keep it hidden._

## whew!

- what we have here is a **Linked List** - one of the fundamental building blocks of many a data structure
- we'll also see Nodes be used in a different way in a few weeks when we start building Trees (they're useful buggers, they are)
- we'll use our linked list on Friday to implement a Stack (and maybe dabble with a Queue?)
  
## performance?

- what is the time complexity for our operations?
  - this ain't bad! (for the most part)
  
## QUESTIONS?

Ask 'em!

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

[EXIT POLL]()

---

## terms used

- [ ] **node**
- [ ] **static member class**
- [ ] **linked list**


## your action items

- [ ] hit an assignment checkpoint or two before end-of-day Saturday (if you wanna grab a Perk or 3) 

## coming up

- [ ] building stacks (and queues?) from linked lists

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**