# Lecture 11

**2021-02-24 (W)**

Recording available here: https://youtu.be/08LheCBiE3I

Code playground here: https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/lecture-playground (do a git pull if you've already cloned this repo before; otherwise, you can clone it into your Eclipse workspace directory)

Anonymous question board here: https://onlinequestions.org/ (20210111)

**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**

   
## checking in 

[poll link]()


## before we begin

- final exam schedule is out...not bad...not bad...
- did you hear about your tuition bump? 10% for BCIS! (Only Bach of Biz Admin and Nursing got this high end...congrats?). Other programs, it's 5.9%.
- reminder of the late penalty policy - it hinges on [this](https://catalog.mtroyal.ca/content.php?catoid=21&navoid=1405&hl=%22Academic+Status%22&returnto=search&print)
- coding topic test b prereq (suggest they focus on that before checkpoint 6!) => HAMMER HOME THAT THIS **MUST** BE COMPLETED BEFORE THE TEST IS WRITTEN!

---

## Review

- we've talked about two **ADT**s primarily - Stacks and Queues (Lists have come along with us for the ride a bit)
  - what basic operations do they have?
  - what are their defining features?
- we've talked about implementing these ADTs...turning them into **data structures** using arrays and linked lists
  - what's the time complexity for their basic operations? (add, remove)
  - what are the strengths and weaknesses of array-backed versions? linked list backed versions?

> _An aside prompted by a student email this morning:_  
> _**So why are we even building our own stuff here?** These data structures already exist in the Java library (and in other languages, too), don't they?_
> 
> - there's the "if you really want to understand something, you should build it" argument
> - there's the "standing on the shoulders of giants" argument
> - there's the "you gotta imitate the masters before becoming a master yourself" argument

## The Plan

We'll talk about a new ADT today: the **Map**

## Map: the ADT

- it's like a dictionary: we have something we want to look up (the definition of a word) based on a special thing (the spelling of the word)
  - now that I think of it...did you guys every actually _use_ a dictionary when you were in school?!?!
- another example: the [periodic table of elements](https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/periodic-table/) lets us look up information on a given element based on a special thing (the atomic number)


### some terminology

- we'll call the "information we're looking up" the **value**
- we'll call the special thing we used to look up a value the **key**
- we'll (unfortunately) also use "map" as a verb: we say that our Map ADT allows us to **map keys to values**


### some further restrictions and oddities

- a key has to map to **one** value
  - think about a map from people to birthdays: each person only has **one** birthday
  - **BUT** it's ok for a key to map to one thing that is itself many things!
    - think about a mapping of people to embarrassing things they've done in their life
- it's ok for multiple keys to map to the same value
  - again, back to the birthdays: multiple people can have the same birthday 
- it's ok for a key to map to itself
- it's ok for a key to map to nothing!
  - like if you've got rescue animals that haven't been given a home yet
  - or if you are just interested in the keys for whatever reason - hey...it can happen

> _If you've taken 2521 - DB I - you may notice that this key/value stuff feels an awful lot like looking up records in a table based on a primary key. Yup - you're right!_
>  
> _You might also notice this feels a bit like the mathematical concept of a function - you stick a value into a function and something comes out. If you stick the same thing in again, you always get the same thing out again. Yup again._
  
### operations

- we have an operation to add key/value pairs; we frequently use the word **put** instead of add
  - a decision whether to _overwrite_ or _reject_ has to be made...but that's more of an implementation detail 
- we have an operation to access key/value pairs; we frequently use the word **get**
-  we need a way to remove a key/value pair
-  it's nice to find out if a key/value pair exists
-  the usual isEmpty/isFull and size can be useful as well
  
  
## Map: data structure approaches

Let's look at some different ways one _might_ implement a Map ADT.

This will lead to a pretty cool thing called a **hash table**.

> _A little aside:_  
> _In many situations, asking Maps to "get" or "contains" is much more common that "putting" and "removing". In these cases, we are **very** interested in making sure our gets/contains are as fast as possible, even if it means our puts/removes are slower._


### some simple possibilities

#### a building block: the MapEntry

- Just like our linked list hinged on us having a **Node**, many Map implementations hinge on a **MapEntry**.
- Should this be a static member class? Maybe not - it can be useful sometimes to have key/value pairs.

#### building a Java interface from our ADT ops

- put
  - what if the key is null?
  - what if key already there?

- get
  - what if it's not there? null or Optional<V>?
- remove
  - what if it's not there?

#### option: an unsorted array

- let's code a simplified version up - assume puts don't have to search
  - don't forget to kick the tires on it!
- time complexity?
- benefits? drawbacks?

#### option: a sorted array

- what benefit does sorting get us?
- looking down the road to the end of the semester, we'll talk about searching/sorting a bit more

#### option: an unsorted linked list

- what differences between this and the unsorted array?

#### option: a sorted linked list

- what differences between this and the sorted array?

### And Now For Something Completely Different

What if we could build a data structure that - under the right circumstances - allowed us O(1) operations for **everything**?

Too good to be true?

Nope.

We'll talk about them on Friday!

## QUESTIONS?

Ask 'em!

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

[EXIT POLL]()

---

## terms used

- [ ] **Map** (the name of an ADT)
- [ ] **map** (associate keys to values)
- [ ] **key**
- [ ] **value**
- [ ] **put**
- [ ] **hash table**
- [ ] **MapEntry**

## your action items

- [ ] hit an assignment checkpoint or two before end-of-day Saturday (if you wanna grab a Perk or 3) 

## coming up

- [ ] building stacks (and queues?) from linked lists

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**