# Lecture 13

**2021-03-03 (W)**

Recording available here: 


Anonymous question board here: https://onlinequestions.org/ (20210113)

**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**

   
## checking in 

[poll link]()


## before we begin

- if you missed the announcement on BB, instructions are up for the coding test
- speaking of which, if you haven't coded up the prereqs yet, get on that. Or tomorrow is gonna be super-unpleasant.
- I'm going on the assumption now that if you haven't submitted assignment one, then you don't plan to. I'll be snagging what's up on GH today and using that to mark.
- if it helps, after this week is over, things are slowly winding down in this course

---

## So...today?

I've got a few things I wanted to cover; but I was hoping to have plenty of time to cover any questions you have before tomorrow and Friday's tests.

### a question from last Friday

This question came in through the anonymous thingamabob early in the last lecture and I didn't get a chance to address it:

> why is it that we are able to do head = null for linked lists instead of head.next = null, and why don't we need to call the constructor to make the head node?

### that dang remove

I had a few folks come in with a buggy remove. Though they weren't working together, they were having the same problem. The code was something like this:

```java
public T remove (int index) {
  Node<T> current = head;
  // if index is out of bounds
  //   throw an exception
  // else if index == 0
  //   handle the case where you remove the head
  } else {
    
    for (int i = 0; i < index; i++) {
      current = current.next;
    }
    current.next = current.next.next;
  }
  size--;
  return current.data;
}
```

What problems do we have here?

On a related note, lemme show you something I whipped up this morning.


### that pseudocode problem

This one in this folder: https://drive.google.com/drive/u/1/folders/1usGutYaw5uxcYJXLc-0STymMm2qgfPvJ

How'd that go?

Some people find pseudocode hard, which is kind of ironic.

Any questions?




## QUESTIONS?

Ask 'em!

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

[EXIT POLL]()

---

## terms used



## your action items

- [ ] just be ready for the 2 topic tests this week

## coming up

- [ ] next week, it's on to recursion. Woo.

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**