# Lecture 15

**2021-03-10 (W)**

Recording available here: 

Code playground used today is here: https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/lecture-playground (do a git pull if you've already cloned this repo before; otherwise, you can clone it into your Eclipse workspace directory)

Anonymous question board here: https://onlinequestions.org/ (20210115)

**!!! Start Recording, JP !!!**

   
## checking in 

[poll link]()


## before we begin


- sorry 'bout the Always Sorted drill. I will get the Iterator screencast out tomorrow morning. It's not that hard (and it's kinda cool, 'cuase then your custom collection classes are for-eachable)...but without having someone walk you through it, it can be kinda weird.
- speaking of drills, the last day for late drill submission will be the last day of winter semester classes - April 13 - at 11:59PM. I've added this to the course outline now in the Drill section.
  - completing drills is a surprisingly effective way to creep up the grade scale
  - remember that you need to spend Perks to submit things late
- I moved the assignment due date because we aren't starting trees until Friday.
- speaking of the assignment, if you're going to be working in a pair for the assignment, please let me know
- we've got a fairly intense 3 weeks ahead, ending with our last Topic Test pair; we then gear down significantly
- our plan for this week and next? *briefly* introduce recursion today and then we'll spend the next 3 lectures on tree-related topics 
- we'll use tomorrow's tutorial to try your hand at a few recursive problems

---

# Looping, Revisited



## EXAMPLE: Countdowner

- write a method that counts down from some given number to 1
  - so if you called `launch(3)`, we'd want to see:

    ```text
    3
    2
    1
    liftoff!
    ```
    
  - if you called `launch(2)`, we'd want to see:

    ```text
    2
    1
    liftoff!
    ```
    
  - calling `launch(1)` would get us:

    ```text
    1
    liftoff!
    ```
    
  - with anything less than 1, we'll it just prints out the liftoff, so launch(0) would give:

    ```text
    liftoff!
    ```


### one way of looking at the problem in a non-loopy way

- would you agree that calling `launch(1)` gives you the same result as printing out a 1 and then calling `launch(0)`?
- would you then also agree that calling `launch(2)` gives you the same result as printing out a 2 and then calling `launch(1)`?
- can you see where this is going? Let's actually code it up, then!


>_I'm going to use https://note.ly/ to trace._


## EXAMPLE: Countupper

Let's try that again. The first one might have just been a fluke.

- write a method that counts up a given number...`printUpTo(1, 3)` would go like this:

    ```text
    1
    2
    3
    WHOA, NELLY!
    ```
    
- `printUptTo(1, 2)`:

    ```text
    1
    2
    WHOA, NELLY!
    ```    
    
- `printUptTo(1,1)`:

    ```text
    1
    WHOA, NELLY!
    ```
    
- `printUpTo(1,0)`:

    ```text
    WHOA, NELLY!
    ```
    
### looking at the problem in a non-loopy way

- would you agree that calling `printUpTo(1, 1)` gives you the same result as printing out a 1 and then calling `printUpTo(1, 0)`?
- would you agree that calling printUpTo(2) would be the same as printing out a 
- would you then also agree that calling `printUpTo(1, 2)` gives you the same result as printing out a 1 and then calling `printUpTo(2, 2)`?
- how about `printUpTo(1,3)? That's a 1 and then `printUpTo(2, 3)?
- can you see where this is going? Let's actually code it up, then!


**trace as well**
    

### some terminology

- a method that calls itself is called a **recursive method** and when a method calls itself, that's known as a **recursive call**
- the "end of the line" case (like when we go under 0 in our launch, or when the current number goes past our upper bound in printUpTo) is called our **base case**. 
    
    > _Every recursive solution MUST have a base case, or you will get **infinite recursion**. What happens when you leave out the base case...let's find out!  (**stack overflow**)_

- the case where we call ourselves, is called our **recursive case**
- a recursive method - at least the ones you bump into most often - will have NO loops; instead, it uses conditionals to determine when to do a recursive call (which often produces results similar to its looping counterpart, as we have seen)

## Some comments on the side

- you can turn any loop into a recursive call (and vice versa)...depending on the problem, being solved this can be an easy process or a hard one
- just because you *can* do something, doesn't mean you *should*: recursion has costs:
  - it can be surprisingly confusing for most of us to think this way...looping seems to come more naturally (though one *could* argue this is the case because we don't *start* with recursion, so by the time we get to it, looping has been ingrained....)
  - it can be slow, since it has the potential to involve many function calls
  - on a related note, all those function calls also take up *space*, so recursion solutions can take up way more space when they run than their iterative counterparts
- so why bother at all?
  - well, to be honest, you can get a lot of stuff done without ever needing recursion, buuuuut...
    - some problems are actually easier to solve recursively than iteratively (a number of these will show up when we start dealing with trees)
    - if you plan on working in some languages (like the very popular and nice-to-have-if-you-want-to-be-employed JS), you need to be at least somewhat comfortable with recursion
    - building the "seeing that solving this problem just involves solving a smaller version of itself" muscle makes you a significantly better problem-solver



## EXAMPLE: return sum of array contents

We can do this pretty simply with a loop, right?

But what about recursively?

### one route

The Think Like a Programmer book makes a useful suggestion: keep your iterative function (for the time being), and then make a solution that temporarily uses the iterative function, and then remove the iterative function. Let's see that in action.

Our temporary function must follow 2 rules:

1. it handles the most trivial case (the base case) without using the iterative function, and
2. when it calls the iterative function, it must pass a smaller version of the original argument in
3. once you're happy with the result, remove the iterative call...with a call to yourself

#### that copyOf call is a bit nasty

OK - that works.

But that copyOf call - it's an O(n) operation that's totally unnecessary. What can we do to get rid of it?

Hint: is there a parameter we could add to our method that seems to be important?

**do a trace**


#### that's better...but it's still kinda lame we need to pass in the length

- We can use a **recursive wrapper** to get around this. (This term I first encountered in the wonderful book "Think Like a Programmer" by V. Anton Spraul - highly highly highly recommended )

## EXAMPLE: return sum of elements in a linked list

Linked structures often lend themselves quite nicely to recursive algorithms, because they're kind of recursive themselves.

_What is **that** supposed to mean?!?_

Well, you can look at a linked list as either:
1. a null node (a.k.a. empty list), or
2. a non-null node called the head...followed by a linked list!

I've got here a `SuperSimpleLinkedList`. All you can do with it is:

- append
- prepend
- size
- isEmpty

It's got a tail reference as well as a head reference (hi, Topic Test B!).

For simplicity's sake, we've gotten rid of the generics, so that summing things makes sense.

### first off, iterative

Shouldn't be too bad - send a runner down the line, summing up as it goes.

### next off, recursive with the temporary step

We know that to do this, we're going to need a way to call our iterative version with a smaller version of the original list - but currently, our iterative version doesn't allow that.

1. Modify our current `sum` so it takes in a parameter - the head of the list we're summing up.
   1. Since the main is still expecting a no-arg sum() - as it rightly should! - we have to make a....?

2. Now that that's out of the way, we can go through our steps. First off: what's the base case?
3. Make a Leap of Faith

**do a trace**


## EXAMPLE: make a forward display

## EXAMPLE: make a backward display


## EXAMPLE: return whether all elements in an array are (blah)

Let's make "blah" a bit more precise: let's go with "greater than some number".

We want to do stuff like this:

  ```java
  int[] array = {4, 2, 5, 7};
  allGreaterThan(1, array); // should return true
  allGreaterThan(4, array); // should return false
  
  // for clarity
  int[] emptyArray = {};
  allGreaterThan(3, emptyArray); // should return true
  ```
  
Do we have a base case?

> _Sure - when the list is empty, we return true._

How about for an array of any length?

> _Let's do our leap of faith: **if** we have a working method, then for an array of arbitrary length, we'll return true if the last item in the array is greater than the cutoff **AND** our working method says all the elements in the remainder of the array are also greater than the cutoff._

> _While we **could** do the same using the **first** element, then we know from previous experience that we'd need to add an additional parameter - the current index we're dealing with - and we'd like to avoid parameter bloat if possible._


## EXAMPLE: return whether all elements in a list are gt

Same as for the array, but this time with lists.

## About wrappers

- only use them if they allow you to create a better public signature (put another way: if you make calling that method less annoying, go for the wrapper!)
- the wrapper will be public, but the method *it* calls should be private...hide that dirty laundry when company's coming over
- note that you don't have to give the recursive method a different name: since its signature will be different, it's ann overloaded method and there's not need to think of a different name!




The fact that this works is (to me) pretty freakin' creepy.

## QUESTIONS?

Ask 'em!

---

**HERE ENDETH THE LESSON**

[EXIT POLL]()

---

## terms used

- [ ] recursive method
- [ ] recursive call
- [ ] base case
- [ ] infinite recursion
- [ ] stack overflow


## your action items

- [ ] get your single drill done
- [ ] stub out asg-02 to get your Perk

## coming up

- [ ] Friday will introduce a new data structure: the **tree**.

**!!! Stop Recording, JP !!!**