# Tutorial Notes - 2021.02.04

## assignment stuffs

- anybody need to pair up? here's a good chance to recruit
- confirm: y'all know there's documentation for the assignment?
  

## changes to Reports

- they're assignees to issues (so more email and they can search)
  - mostly from checkpoint 3...a few checkpoint 2's were there
- FLAWLESS! in issues
  - any project pulled since Jan 29
- so what?
  - you can search for things more easily:
  
  ```
  // Find all things in the 2503 repo you have access to:
  
  is:issue label:report org:MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001
  ```
  
  ```
  // Find all drills (since Jan 29) that are "done"
  
  is:issue label:report org:MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001 FLAWLESS! in:body
  ```
  
- searching GitHub for code: https://docs.github.com/en/github/searching-for-information-on-github/searching-code

## changes to Eclipse project setup

- don't worry about the extra Java Warnings that are there now - the drill submit process doesn't care about those
- there will be extra errors that spit out, because of dupes between PMD/Java Warnings

## when to ask for noojes

- coding takes time...it's a kind of warped badge of honor among programmers to trade war stories
- time is a limited resource
- you have numerous other things to spend your time on besides this course
- be stubborn...but not too stubborn. People are dropping hints that they're spending *way* too much time on drills.
- if you've read the instructions and watched any related screencasts and are stuck on something for more that 20 minutes...get help
  - could be from me, from Steve, Computer Science Club on Discord (they have a 2503 channel and plenty have folks on there have taken the course - ask me for an invite if you're not on there already)...whatever - but get a nooj

## drawing pics and tracing code (thanks, tests!)

- one of the best things you can do to work with the problems you're encountering (adding things in order, working with arrays/ArrayLists, linked lists) is to draw picture. If you're struggling with these things and not drawing things out...then, yeah - you're gonna struggle. The pros do it (do you see all those freaking whiteboards?!?) - you should, too.
- if a test is failing - esp. the not-App ones - then look at what the test is doing...and use that to help trace your code to see what's going wrong - a failing tests is a GIFT.