# Tutorial Notes - 2021.03.11

## the plan

We'll create a recursive version of adding the elements of a linked list together.

Then I'll give you some tasks that involve recursion and you'll code them up!


## getting started

Go to this page (so you can see these instructions):  https://github.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/course-resources/blob/main/tuts/2021-03-11.md

1. create a new Eclipse project (doesn't matter what it's called)
2. make a class called `SuperSimpleLinkedList` in your project
3. copy-pasta this code into the class: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/MRU-CSIS-2503-202101-001/lecture-playground/main/lecture.15/src/SuperSimpleLinkedList.java

    > All you can do with it is:
    >
    > - append
    > - prepend
    > - size
    > - isEmpty  

    >
    > It's got a tail reference as well as a head reference (hi, Topic Test B!).
    >
    > For simplicity's sake, we've gotten rid of the generics, so that summing things makes sense.

4. follow along!

## EXAMPLE: return sum of elements in a linked list

Linked structures often lend themselves quite nicely to recursive algorithms, because they're kind of recursive themselves.

_What is **that** supposed to mean?!?_

Well, you can look at a linked list as either:
1. a null node (a.k.a. empty list), or
2. a non-null node called the head...followed by a linked list!

So our definition has a base case (1) and a recursive case (2) where our definition refers to itself. That's recursive!


### let's do this

So let's think about how we'd solve this problem recursively. 

One way of doing this is by performing a totally weird mental exercise: **assume you have a fully-functioning method that already does the thing you want** and then ask "_if that method existed_, how would I solve this problem?". (I personally call this making a (recursive) Leap of Faith!)

So let's do that. We'll assume we have a method `sum(fromHere)` that exists in our LL class: if you give it a node, it'll give you the sum of every node from that point down to the end.

Then would you agree that to find the sum from a given node onward, that's like adding the contents of that node to `sum(fromHere.next)`? 

  > _The fact that our recursive call is dealing with a smaller list is key here, folks - remember, that if our recursive calls don't deal with a simpler/smaller version of the original problem, we can't use recursion!_

Would you also agree that it's reasonable to say `sum(null)` is 0? I mean, if you have no nodes, then their sum must be 0, right?

Well, let's code it up!

**do a trace**


## YOUR TURN: make a forward and backward display for arrays

Start a new class in your project.
In the `main`, create an integer array and then create a recursive method that when given that array prints it out in forward order to the console.

For example:

```java
int[] nums = {1, 2, 3, 4};
printForward(nums);  // displays 1 2 3 4 in the console
```

Now make another method that prints out the array **backward**:

```java
// assuming nums is the same as above
printBackward(nums);  // displays 4 3 2 1 in the console
```


## YOUR TURN: make a forward and backward display for lists

Start a new class in your project.
In the `main`, create a new SuperSimpleLinkedList object, fill it with some numbers, and then create a recursive method in the SSLL class that prints out the contents of the linked list to the console in order.

For example:

```java
SuperSimpleLinkedList list = new SuperSimpleLinkedList();
list.add(1);
list.add(2);
list.add(3);
list.add(4);

list.printForward();  // displays 1 2 3 4 in the console
```

Then (you guessed it) make a method that prints out the list in reverse order. THIS IS FREAKISHLY SIMPLE USING RECURSION - just try to do it with a loop on a singly-linked list...it's super-ugly.

```java
// assuming the same list as above
list.printBackward(); // displays 4 3 2 1 in the console
```

## looking to the coding topic test C

Here's an example of a question that I'd put on the coding topic test:

Create a recursive method called allGreaterThan, that when given a cutoff number and an array of ints, returns true if every element of the array is greater than the cutoff number.

We want to do stuff like this:

  ```java
  int[] array = {4, 2, 5, 7};
  allGreaterThan(1, array); // should return true
  allGreaterThan(4, array); // should return false (4 & 2 are <= 4)
  
  // how about an empty array?
  int[] emptyArray = {};
  allGreaterThan(3, emptyArray); // should return true
  ```

Now do the same thing for the SuperSimpleLinkedList class: add a method that behaves the same way:

We want to do stuff like this:

  ```java
  // assume list holds 1, 2, 3, 4
  list.allGreaterThan(1); // should return true
  list.allGreaterThan(4); // should return false (4 & 2 are <= 4)
  
  // how about an empty list?
  emptyList.allGreaterThan(3); // should return true
  ```